Whenever people argue that history is a worthless subject or
that there is nothing to be gained by just “memorizing a
bunch of stupid names and dates,” | simply hold my tongue
and smile to myself. What I’m thinking is that, as cliche as it
sounds, you do learn a great deal from history (and woe to
those who fail to learn those lessons). It is remarkable to
think of the number of circumstances and situations in which
even the most rudimentary knowledge of history will turn out
to be invaluable. Take, for example, the issue at hand here. Is
it better for society to instill in future leaders a sense of
competition or cooperation? Those who have not examined
leaders throughout time and across a number of fields might
not have the ability to provide a thorough and convincing
answer to this question, in spite of the fact that it is crucial to
the future functioning of our society. Looking closely at the
question of leadership and how it has worked in the past, |
would have to agree that the best way to prepare young
people for leadership roles is to instill in them a sense of
cooperation.

Let us look first at those leaders who have defined
themselves based on their competitiveness. Although at first,
glance it may appear that a leader must have a competitive
edge in order to gain and then maintain a leadership position,
| will make two points on this subject. First, the desire to
compete is an inherent part of human nature; that is, itis not
something that needs to be “instilled” in young people. Is
there anyone who does not compete in some way or another
every single day? You try to do better than others in your
school work or at the office, or you just try to do better than
yourself in some way, to push yourself. When societies instill
competitiveness in their leaders, it only leads to trouble. The
most blatant example in this case is Adolf Hitler, who took
competition to the very extreme, trying to prove that his race
and his country were superior to all. We do not, however,
need to look that far to find less extreme examples (i.e,
Hitler is not the extreme example that disproves the rule)
The recent economic meltdown was caused in no large part
by the leaders of American banks and financial institutions
who were obsessed with competing for the almighty dollar.
Tiger Woods, the ultimate competitor in recent golfing
history and in many ways a leader who brought the sport of
golf to an entirely new level, destroyed his personal life (and
perhaps his career ~ still yet to be determined) by his
overreaching sense that he could accomplish anything,
whether winning majors or sleeping with as many women as
possible. His history of competitiveness is well documented;
his father pushed him froma very early age to be the ultimate
competitor. It served him well in some respects, but it also
proved to be detrimental and ultimately quite
destructive.Leaders who value cooperation, on the other
ahnd, have historically been less prone to these overreaching,
destructive tendencies. A good case in point would be
Abraham Lincoln. Now, | am sure at this point you are
thinking that Lincoln, who served as President during the Civil
War and who refused to compromise with the South or allow
secession, could not possibly be my model of cooperation!
Think, however, of the way Lincoln structured his Cabinet. He
did not want a group of “yes men” who would agree with
every word he said, but instead he picked people who were
more likely to disagree with his ideas. And he respected their
input, which allowed him to keep the government together in
the North during a very tumultuous period (to say the least).
My point in choosing the Lincoln example is that
competitiveness and conflict may play better to the masses
and be more likely to be recorded in the history books, but it
was his cooperative nature that allowed him to govern
effectively. Imagine if the CEO of a large company were never
able to compromise and insisted that every single thing be
done in exactly her way. Very quickly she would lose the very
people that a company needs in order to survive, people with
new ideas, people ready to make great advances. Without
the ability to work constructively with those who have
conflicting ideas, a leader will never be able to strike deals,
reach consensus, or keep an enterprise on track. Even if you
are the biggest fish in the pond, itis difficult to force your wil
on others forever; eventually a bigger fish comes along (or
the smaller fish team up against you!).

In the end, it seems most critical for society to instill in young
people a sense of cooperation. In part this is true because we
seem to come by our competitive side more naturally, but
cooperation is more often something we struggle to learn
(just think of kids on the playground). And although
competitive victory is more showy, more often than not the
real details of leadership come down to the ability to work
with other people, to compromise and cooperate. Getting to
be President of the United States or the managing director of,
a corporation might require you to win some battles, but
once you are there you will need diplomacy and people-skills.
Those can be difficult to learn, but if you do not have them,
you are likely to be a shortlived leader.
