The recommendation presents a view that I
would agree is successful most of the time, but
one that I cannot fully support due to the “all or
nothing” impression it gives. Certainly as an
educator I agree fully that the best way to elicit
positive response from students is to make use
of students’ positive energy and then encourage
actions that you would like to see repeated. It is
human nature that we all want to be accepted
and achieve on some level, and when people in
authority provide feedback that we have done
something well, the drive to repeat the action
that was praised is bound to be particularly
strong. This blanket statement would obviously
pay dividends in situations in which a teacher
desires to have students repeat particular
behaviors. For example, if an educator is
attempting to teach students -14- proper
classroom etiquette, it would be appropriate to
openly praise a student who raises his or her
hand when wishing to speak or address the class.
In such cases, the teacher may also help shape
positive behaviors by ignoring a student who is
trying to interject without approval from the
teacher. In fact, the decision to ignore students
who are exhibiting inappropriate behaviors of this
type could work very well in this situation, as the
stakes are not very high and the intended
outcome can likely be achieved by such a
method. However, it is important to note here
that this tactic would only be effective in such a
“low-stakes” situation, as when a student speaks
without raising her hand first. As we will discuss
below, ignoring a student who hits another
student, or engages in more serious
misbehaviors, would not be effective or prudent.
To expand on this point, it is important for
teachers to be careful when working with the
second half of this statement, only ignoring
negative actions that are not serious. Take for
instance a student who is -15- misbehaving just
by chatting with a fellow classmate. This student
might not be presenting much of a problem and
may be simply seeking attention. Ignoring the
student might, in fact, be the best solution. Now
assume the negative action is the improper
administering of chemicals in a science
experiment or the bullying of a fellow student. To
ignore these negative actions would be absurd
and negligent. Now you are allowing a problem
to persist, one that could potentially lead to
much bigger and more dangerous issues. In a
more serious situation, addressing the negative
actions quickly and properly could stop the
problem it in its tracks. It is for reasons like this
that I do not advocate the idea that a teacher
can be successful by simply ignoring negative
actions. I do, however, greatly support the idea
that the central focus of teaching should be to
build on and encourage positive actions.
However, the author's all-encompasing
statement leaves too many negative possibilities
for the classroom. Perhaps a better way to
phrase this statement would be to say, “The best
-16- way to teach is to praise positive actions
and ignore negative ones that are not debilitating
to class efficiency or the safety of any
individual”. Thus, in the original statement, there
are indeed some good intentions, and there could
be a lot of merit in adopting its basic principles.
Data proves that positive support can
substantially increase motivation and desire in
students and contribute to positive
achievements. In fact, most studies of teaching
efficacy indicate that praising positive actions
and ignoring negative ones can create a more
stable and efficient classroom. It needs to be
stressed, however, that this tool is only effective
at certain levels of misbehavior. As mentioned
above, when the behavior is precipitated by
feelings of revenge, power or total self-
worthlessness, this methodology will likely not
work. It is likely to be very successful, however,
when -17- the drive behind the misbehavior is
simple attention seeking. In many of these
instances, if the teacher demonstrates clearly
that inappropriate behavior does not result in the
gaining of attention, students are more likely to
seek attention by behaving properly. Should the
student choose this path, then the ignoring has
worked and when the positive behavior is
exhibited, then the teacher can utilize the first
part of the theory and support or praise this
behavior. Now it is much more likely to be
repeated. If the student does not choose this
path and instead elects to raise the actions to a
higher level that presents a more serious issue,
then ignorance alone cannot work and other
methods must be employed. In conclusion, one
can appreciate the credo expressed in this
instance, but surely we all can see the potential
error of following it through to the extreme.
